                alice's adventures in wonderland

                          lewis carroll

               the millennium fulcrum edition 3.0




                            chapter i

                      down the rabbit-hole


  alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister
on the bank, and of having nothing to do:  once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, `and what is the use of a book,'
thought alice `without pictures or conversation?'

  so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could,
for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether
the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble
of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white
rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

  there was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did alice
think it so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to
itself, `oh dear!  oh dear!  i shall be late!'  (when she thought
it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have
wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural);
but when the rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-
pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, alice started to
her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop
down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

  in another moment down went alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

  the rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a
moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down a very deep well.

  either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she
had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to
wonder what was going to happen next.  first, she tried to look
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to
see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves;
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  she
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was
labelled `orange marmalade', but to her great disappointment it
was empty:  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
fell past it.

  `well!' thought alice to herself, `after such a fall as this, i
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!  how brave they'll
all think me at home!  why, i wouldn't say anything about it,
even if i fell off the top of the house!' (which was very likely
true.)

  down, down, down.  would the fall never come to an end!  `i
wonder how many miles i've fallen by this time?' she said aloud.
`i must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  let
me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, i think--' (for,
you see, alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) `--yes,
that's about the right distance--but then i wonder what latitude
or longitude i've got to?'  (alice had no idea what latitude was,
or longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.)

  presently she began again.  `i wonder if i shall fall right
through the earth!  how funny it'll seem to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward!  the antipathies, i
think--' (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this
time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) `--but i shall
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
please, ma'am, is this new zealand or australia?' (and she tried
to curtsey as she spoke--fancy curtseying as you're falling
through the air!  do you think you could manage it?)  `and what
an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!  no, it'll
never do to ask:  perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere.'

  down, down, down.  there was nothing else to do, so alice soon
began talking again.  `dinah'll miss me very much to-night, i
should think!'  (dinah was the cat.)  `i hope they'll remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time.  dinah my dear!  i wish you were
down here with me!  there are no mice in the air, i'm afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
but do cats eat bats, i wonder?'  and here alice began to get
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, `do cats eat bats?  do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `do
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either
question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.  she felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, `now, dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

  alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her
was another long passage, and the white rabbit was still in
sight, hurrying down it.  there was not a moment to be lost:
away went alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, `oh my ears and whiskers, how late
it's getting!'  she was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the roof.

  there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked;
and when alice had been all the way down one side and up the
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

  suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of
solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the
doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of
them.  however, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little
door about fifteen inches high:  she tried the little golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

  alice opened the door and found that it led into a small
passage, not much larger than a rat-hole:  she knelt down and
looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
how she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about
among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but
she could not even get her head though the doorway; `and even if
my head would go through,' thought poor alice, `it would be of
very little use without my shoulders.  oh, how i wish
i could shut up like a telescope!  i think i could, if i only
know how to begin.'  for, you see, so many out-of-the-way things
had happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.

  there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like
telescopes:  this time she found a little bottle on it, (`which
certainly was not here before,' said alice,) and round the neck
of the bottle was a paper label, with the words `drink me'
beautifully printed on it in large letters.

  it was all very well to say `drink me,' but the wise little
alice was not going to do that in a hurry.  `no, i'll look
first,' she said, `and see whether it's marked "poison" or not';
for she had read several nice little histories about children who
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
things, all because they would not remember the simple rules
their friends had taught them:  such as, that a red-hot poker
will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had
never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
`poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
later.

  however, this bottle was not marked `poison,' so alice ventured
to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort
of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished
it off.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

  `what a curious feeling!' said alice; `i must be shutting up
like a telescope.'

  and so it was indeed:  she was now only ten inches high, and
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
first, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was
going to shrink any further:  she felt a little nervous about
this; `for it might end, you know,' said alice to herself, `in my
going out altogether, like a candle.  i wonder what i should be
like then?'  and she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

  after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided
on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor alice!
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it,
she found she could not possibly reach it:  she could see it
quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb
up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying,
the poor little thing sat down and cried.

  `come, there's no use in crying like that!' said alice to
herself, rather sharply; `i advise you to leave off this minute!'
she generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very
seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  `but it's no
use now,' thought poor alice, `to pretend to be two people!  why,
there's hardly enough of me left to make one respectable
person!'

  soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
which the words `eat me' were beautifully marked in currants.
`well, i'll eat it,' said alice, `and if it makes me grow larger,
i can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, i can creep
under the door; so either way i'll get into the garden, and i
don't care which happens!'

  she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, `which
way?  which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
happens when one eats cake, but alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen,
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
common way.

  so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *




                           chapter ii

                        the pool of tears


  `curiouser and curiouser!' cried alice (she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
english); `now i'm opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was!  good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
far off).  `oh, my poor little feet, i wonder who will put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  i'm sure _i_ shan't
be able!  i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
about you:  you must manage the best way you can; --but i must be
kind to them,' thought alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the
way i want to go!  let me see:  i'll give them a new pair of
boots every christmas.'

  and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
`they must go by the carrier,' she thought; `and how funny it'll
seem, sending presents to one's own feet!  and how odd the
directions will look!

            alice's right foot, esq.
                hearthrug,
                    near the fender,
                        (with alice's love).

oh dear, what nonsense i'm talking!'

  just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  poor alice!  it was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  `you ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said alice, `a great
girl like you,' (she might well say this), `to go on crying in
this way!  stop this moment, i tell you!'  but she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
it was the white rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, `oh! the duchess, the duchess! oh! won't she
be savage if i've kept her waiting!'  alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `if you please,
sir--'  the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
`dear, dear!  how queer everything is to-day!  and yesterday
things went on just as usual.  i wonder if i've been changed in
the night?  let me think:  was i the same when i got up this
morning?  i almost think i can remember feeling a little
different.  but if i'm not the same, the next question is, who in
the world am i?  ah, that's the great puzzle!'  and she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  `i'm sure i'm not ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and i'm
sure i can't be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  besides, she's she, and i'm i,
and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!  i'll try if i know all the
things i used to know.  let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear!
i shall never get to twenty at that rate!  however, the
multiplication table doesn't signify:  let's try geography.
london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of rome,
and rome--no, that's all wrong, i'm certain!  i must have been
changed for mabel!  i'll try and say "how doth the little--"'
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--

            `how doth the little crocodile
              improve his shining tail,
            and pour the waters of the nile
              on every golden scale!

            `how cheerfully he seems to grin,
              how neatly spread his claws,
            and welcome little fishes in
              with gently smiling jaws!'

  `i'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor alice, and
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, `i must be mabel
after all, and i shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn!  no, i've made up my mind about it; if i'm
mabel, i'll stay down here!  it'll be no use their putting their
heads down and saying "come up again, dear!"  i shall only look
up and say "who am i then?  tell me that first, and then, if i
like being that person, i'll come up:  if not, i'll stay down
here till i'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried alice, with a
sudden burst of tears, `i do wish they would put their heads
down!  i am so very tired of being all alone here!'

  as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
surprised to see that she had put on one of the rabbit's little
white kid gloves while she was talking.  `how can i have done
that?' she thought.  `i must be growing small again.'  she got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

`that was a narrow escape!' said alice, a good deal frightened at
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed
back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child,
`for i never was so small as this before, never!  and i declare
it's too bad, that it is!'

  as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  her first
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, `and in that
case i can go back by railway,' she said to herself.  (alice had
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the english coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.)  however, she soon made out that
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
feet high.

  `i wish i hadn't cried so much!' said alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out.  `i shall be punished for it now, i
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  that will be a queer
thing, to be sure!  however, everything is queer to-day.'

  just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  `would it be of any use, now,' thought alice, `to speak to this
mouse?  everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that i should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, there's no harm in
trying.'  so she began:  `o mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  i am very tired of swimming about here, o mouse!'
(alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brother's latin grammar, `a mouse--of a mouse--to a
mouse--a mouse--o mouse!'  the mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  `perhaps it doesn't understand english,' thought alice; `i
daresay it's a french mouse, come over with william the
conqueror.'  (for, with all her knowledge of history, alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)  so she
began again:  `ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in
her french lesson-book.  the mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  `oh, i beg
your pardon!' cried alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animal's feelings.  `i quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

  `not like cats!' cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  `would you like cats if you were me?'

  `well, perhaps not,' said alice in a soothing tone:  `don't be
angry about it.  and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah:
i think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
she is such a dear quiet thing,' alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, `and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and
she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital
one for catching mice--oh, i beg your pardon!' cried alice again,
for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  `we won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not.'

  `we indeed!' cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  `as if i would talk on such a subject!  our family
always hated cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  don't let me hear
the name again!'

  `i won't indeed!' said alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  `are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?'
the mouse did not answer, so alice went on eagerly:  `there is
such a nice little dog near our house i should like to show you!
a little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  and it'll fetch things when you throw them, and
it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--i
can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
he says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried alice in a
sorrowful tone, `i'm afraid i've offended it again!'  for the
mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

  so she called softly after it, `mouse dear!  do come back
again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't
like them!'  when the mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale (with passion, alice
thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `let us get to
the shore, and then i'll tell you my history, and you'll
understand why it is i hate cats and dogs.'

  it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
duck and a dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



                           chapter iii

                  a caucus-race and a long tale


  they were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the
bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  the first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, `i am older than you, and must know better';
and this alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, `sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  i'll
soon make you dry enough!'  they all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the mouse in the middle.  alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  `ahem!' said the mouse with an important air, `are you all ready?
this is the driest thing i know.  silence all round, if you please!
"william the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  edwin and
morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria--"'

  `ugh!' said the lory, with a shiver.

  `i beg your pardon!' said the mouse, frowning, but very
politely:  `did you speak?'

  `not i!' said the lory hastily.

  `i thought you did,' said the mouse.  `--i proceed.  "edwin and
morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him:
and even stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found
it advisable--"'

  `found what?' said the duck.

  `found it,' the mouse replied rather crossly:  `of course you
know what "it" means.'

  `i know what "it" means well enough, when i find a thing,' said
the duck:  `it's generally a frog or a worm.  the question is,
what did the archbishop find?'

  the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on,
`"--found it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william
and offer him the crown.  william's conduct at first was
moderate.  but the insolence of his normans--"  how are you
getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to alice as it
spoke.

  `as wet as ever,' said alice in a melancholy tone:  `it doesn't
seem to dry me at all.'

  `in that case,' said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, `i
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more
energetic remedies--'

  `speak english!' said the eaglet.  `i don't know the meaning of
half those long words, and, what's more, i don't believe you do
either!'  and the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile:
some of the other birds tittered audibly.

  `what i was going to say,' said the dodo in an offended tone,
`was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucus-race.'

  `what is a caucus-race?' said alice; not that she wanted much
to know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

  `why,' said the dodo, `the best way to explain it is to do it.'
(and, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, i will tell you how the dodo managed it.)

  first it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (`the
exact shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there.  there was no `one,
two, three, and away,' but they began running when they liked,
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over.  however, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the dodo suddenly called
out `the race is over!' and they all crowded round it, panting,
and asking, `but who has won?'

  this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon
its forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare,
in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.  at
last the dodo said, `everybody has won, and all must have
prizes.'

  `but who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices
asked.

  `why, she, of course,' said the dodo, pointing to alice with
one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her,
calling out in a confused way, `prizes! prizes!'

  alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt
water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
there was exactly one a-piece all round.

  `but she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the mouse.

  `of course,' the dodo replied very gravely.  `what else have
you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to alice.

  `only a thimble,' said alice sadly.

  `hand it over here,' said the dodo.

  then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying `we beg your acceptance of
this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.

  alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.

  the next thing was to eat the comfits:  this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on
the back.  however, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and begged the mouse to tell them something more.

  `you promised to tell me your history, you know,' said alice,
`and why it is you hate--c and d,' she added in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be offended again.

  `mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the mouse, turning to
alice, and sighing.

  `it is a long tail, certainly,' said alice, looking down with
wonder at the mouse's tail; `but why do you call it sad?'  and
she kept on puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:--

                    `fury said to a
                   mouse, that he
                 met in the
               house,
            "let us
              both go to
                law:  i will
                  prosecute
                    you.  --come,
                       i'll take no
                        denial; we
                     must have a
                 trial:  for
              really this
           morning i've
          nothing
         to do."
           said the
             mouse to the
               cur, "such
                 a trial,
                   dear sir,
                         with
                     no jury
                  or judge,
                would be
              wasting
             our
              breath."
               "i'll be
                 judge, i'll
                   be jury,"
                         said
                    cunning
                      old fury:
                     "i'll
                      try the
                         whole
                          cause,
                             and
                        condemn
                       you
                      to
                       death."'


  `you are not attending!' said the mouse to alice severely.
`what are you thinking of?'

  `i beg your pardon,' said alice very humbly:  `you had got to
the fifth bend, i think?'

  `i had not!' cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily.

  `a knot!' said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her.  `oh, do let me help to undo it!'

  `i shall do nothing of the sort,' said the mouse, getting up
and walking away.  `you insult me by talking such nonsense!'

  `i didn't mean it!' pleaded poor alice.  `but you're so easily
offended, you know!'

  the mouse only growled in reply.

  `please come back and finish your story!' alice called after
it; and the others all joined in chorus, `yes, please do!' but
the mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.

  `what a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the lory, as soon as it
was quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of
saying to her daughter `ah, my dear!  let this be a lesson to you
never to lose your temper!'  `hold your tongue, ma!' said the
young crab, a little snappishly.  `you're enough to try the
patience of an oyster!'

  `i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do!' said alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular.  `she'd soon fetch it back!'

  `and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question?'
said the lory.

  alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet:  `dinah's our cat.  and she's such a capital one for
catching mice you can't think!  and oh, i wish you could see her
after the birds!  why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look
at it!'

  this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
some of the birds hurried off at once:  one old magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, `i really must be
getting home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!' and a canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, `come away, my
dears!  it's high time you were all in bed!'  on various pretexts
they all moved off, and alice was soon left alone.

  `i wish i hadn't mentioned dinah!' she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  `nobody seems to like her, down here, and i'm
sure she's the best cat in the world!  oh, my dear dinah!  i
wonder if i shall ever see you any more!'  and here poor alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
in a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



                           chapter iv

                the rabbit sends in a little bill


  it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something;
and she heard it muttering to itself `the duchess!  the duchess!
oh my dear paws!  oh my fur and whiskers!  she'll get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  where can i have
dropped them, i wonder?'  alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, `why, mary ann, what are
you doing out here?  run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  quick, now!'  and alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  `he took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran.
`how surprised he'll be when he finds out who i am!  but i'd
better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if i can find them.'
as she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name `w. rabbit'
engraved upon it.  she went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real mary ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  `how queer it seems,' alice said to herself, `to be going
messages for a rabbit!  i suppose dinah'll be sending me on
messages next!'  and she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  `"miss alice!  come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "coming in a minute, nurse!  but i've got to see
that the mouse doesn't get out."  only i don't think,' alice went
on, `that they'd let dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!'

  by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves:  she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-
glass.  there was no label this time with the words `drink me,'
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  `i know
something interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself,
`whenever i eat or drink anything; so i'll just see what this
bottle does.  i do hope it'll make me grow large again, for
really i'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'

  it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  she hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
`that's quite enough--i hope i shan't grow any more--as it is, i
can't get out at the door--i do wish i hadn't drunk quite so
much!'

  alas! it was too late to wish that!  she went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself `now i can do no more,
whatever happens.  what will become of me?'

  luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  `it was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor alice, `when one
wasn't always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  i almost wish i hadn't gone down that
rabbit-hole--and yet--and yet--it's rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  i do wonder what can have happened to me!
when i used to read fairy-tales, i fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here i am in the middle of one!  there
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  and when
i grow up, i'll write one--but i'm grown up now,' she added in a
sorrowful tone; `at least there's no room to grow up any more
here.'

  `but then,' thought alice, `shall i never get any older than i
am now?  that'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--
but then--always to have lessons to learn!  oh, i shouldn't like that!'

  `oh, you foolish alice!' she answered herself.  `how can you
learn lessons in here?  why, there's hardly room for you, and no
room at all for any lesson-books!'

  and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  `mary ann!  mary ann!' said the voice.  `fetch me my gloves
this moment!'  then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it;
but, as the door opened inwards, and alice's elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  alice heard it
say to itself `then i'll go round and get in at the window.'

  `that you won't' thought alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  she did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something
of the sort.

  next came an angry voice--the rabbit's--`pat! pat!  where are
you?'  and then a voice she had never heard before, `sure then
i'm here!  digging for apples, yer honour!'

  `digging for apples, indeed!' said the rabbit angrily.  `here!
come and help me out of this!'  (sounds of more broken glass.)

  `now tell me, pat, what's that in the window?'

  `sure, it's an arm, yer honour!'  (he pronounced it `arrum.')

  `an arm, you goose!   who ever saw one that size?  why, it
fills the whole window!'

  `sure, it does, yer honour:  but it's an arm for all that.'

  `well, it's got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!'

  there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear
whispers now and then; such as, `sure, i don't like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!'  `do as i tell you, you coward!' and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  this time there were two little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  `what a number of cucumber-frames there
must be!' thought alice.  `i wonder what they'll do next!  as for
pulling me out of the window, i only wish they could!  i'm sure i
don't want to stay in here any longer!'

  she waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voices all talking together:  she made out the words:
`where's the other ladder?--why, i hadn't to bring but one;
bill's got the other--bill! fetch it here, lad!--here, put 'em up
at this corner--no, tie 'em together first--they don't reach half
high enough yet--oh! they'll do well enough; don't be particular--
here, bill! catch hold of this rope--will the roof bear?--mind
that loose slate--oh, it's coming down!  heads below!' (a loud
crash)--`now, who did that?--it was bill, i fancy--who's to go
down the chimney?--nay, i shan't! you do it!--that i won't,
then!--bill's to go down--here, bill! the master says you're to
go down the chimney!'

  `oh! so bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said
alice to herself.  `shy, they seem to put everything upon bill!
i wouldn't be in bill's place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure; but i think i can kick a little!'

  she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what
sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself `this is bill,' she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  the first thing she heard was a general chorus of `there goes
bill!' then the rabbit's voice along--`catch him, you by the
hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices--`hold
up his head--brandy now--don't choke him--how was it, old fellow?
what happened to you?  tell us all about it!'

  last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (`that's bill,'
thought alice,) `well, i hardly know--no more, thank ye; i'm
better now--but i'm a deal too flustered to tell you--all i know
is, something comes at me like a jack-in-the-box, and up i goes
like a sky-rocket!'

  `so you did, old fellow!' said the others.

  `we must burn the house down!' said the rabbit's voice; and
alice called out as loud as she could, `if you do.  i'll set
dinah at you!'

  there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to
herself, `i wonder what they will do next!  if they had any
sense, they'd take the roof off.'  after a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and alice heard the rabbit say, `a
barrowful will do, to begin with.'

  `a barrowful of what?' thought alice; but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
`i'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out,
`you'd better not do that again!' which produced another dead
silence.

  alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  `if i eat one of these cakes,' she
thought, `it's sure to make some change in my size; and as it
can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, i
suppose.'

  so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  as soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
the poor little lizard, bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
they all made a rush at alice the moment she appeared; but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  `the first thing i've got to do,' said alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, `is to grow to my right size again;
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
i think that will be the best plan.'

  it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
`poor little thing!' said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it; then alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape;
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  `and yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  `i should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if--if i'd only been the right size to do it!  oh
dear!  i'd nearly forgotten that i've got to grow up again!  let
me see--how is it to be managed?  i suppose i ought to eat or
drink something or other; but the great question is, what?'

  the great question certainly was, what?  alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
﻿the project gutenberg ebook of moby dick; or the whale, by herman melville

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: moby dick; or the whale

author: herman melville

last updated: january 3, 2009
posting date: december 25, 2008 [ebook #2701]
release date: june, 2001

language: english


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook moby dick; or the whale ***




produced by daniel lazarus and jonesey





moby dick; or the whale

by herman melville




original transcriber's notes:

this text is a combination of etexts, one from the now-defunct eris
project at virginia tech and one from project gutenberg's archives. the
proofreaders of this version are indebted to the university of adelaide
library for preserving the virginia tech version. the resulting etext
was compared with a public domain hard copy version of the text.

in chapters 24, 89, and 90, we substituted a capital l for the symbol
for the british pound, a unit of currency.




etymology.

(supplied by a late consumptive usher to a grammar school)

the pale usher--threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain; i see him
now. he was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queer
handkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all
the known nations of the world. he loved to dust his old grammars; it
somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.

"while you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by what
name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue leaving out, through
ignorance, the letter h, which almost alone maketh the signification of
the word, you deliver that which is not true." --hackluyt

"whale.... sw. and dan. hval. this animal is named from roundness or
rolling; for in dan. hvalt is arched or vaulted." --webster's dictionary

"whale.... it is more immediately from the dut. and ger. wallen; a.s.
walw-ian, to roll, to wallow." --richardson's dictionary

     ketos,               greek.
     cetus,               latin.
     whoel,               anglo-saxon.
     hvalt,               danish.
     wal,                 dutch.
     hwal,                swedish.
     whale,               icelandic.
     whale,               english.
     baleine,             french.
     ballena,             spanish.
     pekee-nuee-nuee,     fegee.
     pehee-nuee-nuee,     erromangoan.




extracts (supplied by a sub-sub-librarian).

it will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm of a
poor devil of a sub-sub appears to have gone through the long vaticans
and street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random allusions to
whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred or
profane. therefore you must not, in every case at least, take the
higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic, in these
extracts, for veritable gospel cetology. far from it. as touching the
ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, these
extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording a glancing
bird's eye view of what has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied,
and sung of leviathan, by many nations and generations, including our
own.

so fare thee well, poor devil of a sub-sub, whose commentator i am. thou
belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this world
will ever warm; and for whom even pale sherry would be too rosy-strong;
but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too;
and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full eyes
and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness--give it up,
sub-subs! for by how much the more pains ye take to please the world,
by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless! would that i could
clear out hampton court and the tuileries for ye! but gulp down your
tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts; for your friends
who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens, and
making refugees of long-pampered gabriel, michael, and raphael, against
your coming. here ye strike but splintered hearts together--there, ye
shall strike unsplinterable glasses!


extracts.

"and god created great whales." --genesis.

"leviathan maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to
be hoary." --job.

"now the lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up jonah." --jonah.

"there go the ships; there is that leviathan whom thou hast made to play
therein." --psalms.

"in that day, the lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword,
shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked
serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea." --isaiah

"and what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of this monster's
mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes all incontinently that
foul great swallow of his, and perisheth in the bottomless gulf of his
paunch." --holland's plutarch's morals.

"the indian sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are: among
which the whales and whirlpooles called balaene, take up as much in
length as four acres or arpens of land." --holland's pliny.

"scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about sunrise a
great many whales and other monsters of the sea, appeared. among the
former, one was of a most monstrous size.... this came towards us,
open-mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea before
him into a foam." --tooke's lucian. "the true history."

"he visited this country also with a view of catching horse-whales,
which had bones of very great value for their teeth, of which he brought
some to the king.... the best whales were catched in his own country, of
which some were forty-eight, some fifty yards long. he said that he was
one of six who had killed sixty in two days." --other or other's verbal
narrative taken down from his mouth by king alfred, a.d. 890.

"and whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, that
enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) mouth, are
immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea-gudgeon retires into it in
great security, and there sleeps." --montaigne. --apology for raimond
sebond.

"let us fly, let us fly! old nick take me if is not leviathan described
by the noble prophet moses in the life of patient job." --rabelais.

"this whale's liver was two cartloads." --stowe's annals.

"the great leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boiling pan."
--lord bacon's version of the psalms.

"touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have received
nothing certain. they grow exceeding fat, insomuch that an incredible
quantity of oil will be extracted out of one whale." --ibid. "history of
life and death."

"the sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an inward bruise."
--king henry.

"very like a whale." --hamlet.

     "which to secure, no skill of leach's art
     mote him availle, but to returne againe
     to his wound's worker, that with lowly dart,
     dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine,
     like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine."
     --the faerie queen.

"immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can in a peaceful
calm trouble the ocean til it boil." --sir william davenant. preface to
gondibert.

"what spermacetti is, men might justly doubt, since the learned
hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, nescio quid sit."
--sir t. browne. of sperma ceti and the sperma ceti whale. vide his v.
e.

     "like spencer's talus with his modern flail
     he threatens ruin with his ponderous tail.
   ...
     their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears,
     and on his back a grove of pikes appears."
     --waller's battle of the summer islands.

"by art is created that great leviathan, called a commonwealth or
state--(in latin, civitas) which is but an artificial man." --opening
sentence of hobbes's leviathan.

"silly mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had been a sprat
in the mouth of a whale." --pilgrim's progress.

     "that sea beast
     leviathan, which god of all his works
     created hugest that swim the ocean stream." --paradise lost.

     ---"there leviathan,
     hugest of living creatures, in the deep
     stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims,
     and seems a moving land; and at his gills
     draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea." --ibid.

"the mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and have a sea of oil
swimming in them." --fulller's profane and holy state.

     "so close behind some promontory lie
     the huge leviathan to attend their prey,
     and give no chance, but swallow in the fry,
     which through their gaping jaws mistake the way."
     --dryden's annus mirabilis.

"while the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they cut off his
head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it will come; but it
will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet water." --thomas edge's ten
voyages to spitzbergen, in purchas.

"in their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, and in
wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes and vents, which
nature has placed on their shoulders." --sir t. herbert's voyages into
asia and africa. harris coll.

"here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were forced to
proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they should run their ship
upon them." --schouten's sixth circumnavigation.

"we set sail from the elbe, wind n.e. in the ship called the
jonas-in-the-whale.... some say the whale can't open his mouth, but that
is a fable.... they frequently climb up the masts to see whether they
can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his pains....
i was told of a whale taken near shetland, that had above a barrel of
herrings in his belly.... one of our harpooneers told me that he caught
once a whale in spitzbergen that was white all over." --a voyage to
greenland, a.d. 1671 harris coll.

"several whales have come in upon this coast (fife) anno 1652, one
eighty feet in length of the whale-bone kind came in, which (as i was
informed), besides a vast quantity of oil, did afford 500 weight of
baleen. the jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of pitferren."
--sibbald's fife and kinross.

"myself have agreed to try whether i can master and kill this
sperma-ceti whale, for i could never hear of any of that sort that was
killed by any man, such is his fierceness and swiftness." --richard
strafford's letter from the bermudas. phil. trans. a.d. 1668.

"whales in the sea god's voice obey." --n. e. primer.

"we saw also abundance of large whales, there being more in those
southern seas, as i may say, by a hundred to one; than we have to the
northward of us." --captain cowley's voyage round the globe, a.d. 1729.

"... and the breath of the whale is frequently attended with such an
insupportable smell, as to bring on a disorder of the brain." --ulloa's
south america.

     "to fifty chosen sylphs of special note,
     we trust the important charge, the petticoat.
     oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail,
     tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale."
     --rape of the lock.

"if we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with those
that take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they will appear
contemptible in the comparison. the whale is doubtless the largest
animal in creation." --goldsmith, nat. hist.

"if you should write a fable for little fishes, you would make them
speak like great wales." --goldsmith to johnson.

"in the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, but it was
found to be a dead whale, which some asiatics had killed, and were then
towing ashore. they seemed to endeavor to conceal themselves behind the
whale, in order to avoid being seen by us." --cook's voyages.

"the larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. they stand in so
great dread of some of them, that when out at sea they are afraid to
mention even their names, and carry dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood,
and some other articles of the same nature in their boats, in order to
terrify and prevent their too near approach." --uno von troil's letters
on banks's and solander's voyage to iceland in 1772.

"the spermacetti whale found by the nantuckois, is an active, fierce
animal, and requires vast address and boldness in the fishermen."
--thomas jefferson's whale memorial to the french minister in 1778.

"and pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it?" --edmund burke's
reference in parliament to the nantucket whale-fishery.

"spain--a great whale stranded on the shores of europe." --edmund burke.
(somewhere.)

"a tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to be grounded on
the consideration of his guarding and protecting the seas from pirates
and robbers, is the right to royal fish, which are whale and sturgeon.
and these, when either thrown ashore or caught near the coast, are the
property of the king." --blackstone.

     "soon to the sport of death the crews repair:
     rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends
     the barbed steel, and every turn attends."
     --falconer's shipwreck.

     "bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires,
     and rockets blew self driven,
     to hang their momentary fire
     around the vault of heaven.

     "so fire with water to compare,
     the ocean serves on high,
     up-spouted by a whale in air,
     to express unwieldy joy." --cowper, on the queen's
     visit to london.

"ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart at
a stroke, with immense velocity." --john hunter's account of the
dissection of a whale. (a small sized one.)

"the aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipe of the
water-works at london bridge, and the water roaring in its passage
through that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocity to the blood
gushing from the whale's heart." --paley's theology.

"the whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet." --baron cuvier.

"in 40 degrees south, we saw spermacetti whales, but did not take
any till the first of may, the sea being then covered with them."
--colnett's voyage for the purpose of extending the spermaceti whale
fishery.

     "in the free element beneath me swam,
     floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle,
     fishes of every colour, form, and kind;
     which language cannot paint, and mariner
     had never seen; from dread leviathan
     to insect millions peopling every wave:
     gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands,
     led by mysterious instincts through that waste
     and trackless region, though on every side
     assaulted by voracious enemies,
     whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw,
     with swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs."
     --montgomery's world before the flood.

     "io!  paean!  io! sing.
     to the finny people's king.
     not a mightier whale than this
     in the vast atlantic is;
     not a fatter fish than he,
     flounders round the polar sea."
     --charles lamb's triumph of the whale.

"in the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing the
whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one observed:
there--pointing to the sea--is a green pasture where our children's
grand-children will go for bread." --obed macy's history of nantucket.

"i built a cottage for susan and myself and made a gateway in the form
of a gothic arch, by setting up a whale's jaw bones." --hawthorne's
twice told tales.

"she came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had been killed
by a whale in the pacific ocean, no less than forty years ago." --ibid.

"no, sir, 'tis a right whale," answered tom; "i saw his sprout; he threw
up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a christian would wish to look at.
he's a raal oil-butt, that fellow!" --cooper's pilot.

"the papers were brought in, and we saw in the berlin gazette
that whales had been introduced on the stage there." --eckermann's
conversations with goethe.

"my god! mr. chace, what is the matter?" i answered, "we have been stove
by a whale." --"narrative of the shipwreck of the whale ship essex of
nantucket, which was attacked and finally destroyed by a large sperm
whale in the pacific ocean." by owen chace of nantucket, first mate of
said vessel. new york, 1821.

     "a mariner sat in the shrouds one night,
     the wind was piping free;
     now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale,
     and the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale,
     as it floundered in the sea."
     --elizabeth oakes smith.

"the quantity of line withdrawn from the boats engaged in the capture
of this one whale, amounted altogether to 10,440 yards or nearly six
english miles....

"sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the air, which,
cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of three or four miles."
--scoresby.

"mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, the
infuriated sperm whale rolls over and over; he rears his enormous head,
and with wide expanded jaws snaps at everything around him; he rushes
at the boats with his head; they are propelled before him with vast
swiftness, and sometimes utterly destroyed.... it is a matter of great
astonishment that the consideration of the habits of so interesting,
and, in a commercial point of view, so important an animal (as the sperm
whale) should have been so entirely neglected, or should have excited
so little curiosity among the numerous, and many of them competent
observers, that of late years, must have possessed the most abundant
and the most convenient opportunities of witnessing their habitudes."
--thomas beale's history of the sperm whale, 1839.

"the cachalot" (sperm whale) "is not only better armed than the true
whale" (greenland or right whale) "in possessing a formidable weapon
at either extremity of its body, but also more frequently displays a
disposition to employ these weapons offensively and in manner at once so
artful, bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being regarded as the
most dangerous to attack of all the known species of the whale tribe."
--frederick debell bennett's whaling voyage round the globe, 1840.

     october 13.  "there she blows," was sung out from the mast-head.
     "where away?" demanded the captain.
     "three points off the lee bow, sir."
     "raise up your wheel.  steady!"  "steady, sir."
     "mast-head ahoy!  do you see that whale now?"
     "ay ay, sir!  a shoal of sperm whales!  there she blows!  there she
     breaches!"
     "sing out! sing out every time!"
     "ay ay, sir!  there she blows! there--there--thar she
     blows--bowes--bo-o-os!"
     "how far off?"
     "two miles and a half."
     "thunder and lightning! so near!  call all hands."
     --j. ross browne's etchings of a whaling cruize.  1846.

"the whale-ship globe, on board of which vessel occurred the horrid
transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the island of
nantucket." --"narrative of the globe," by lay and hussey survivors.
a.d. 1828.

being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, he parried the
assault for some time with a lance; but the furious monster at length
rushed on the boat; himself and comrades only being preserved by leaping
into the water when they saw the onset was inevitable." --missionary
journal of tyerman and bennett.

"nantucket itself," said mr. webster, "is a very striking and peculiar
portion of the national interest. there is a population of eight or nine
thousand persons living here in the sea, adding largely every year
to the national wealth by the boldest and most persevering industry."
--report of daniel webster's speech in the u. s. senate, on the
application for the erection of a breakwater at nantucket. 1828.

"the whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him in a moment."
--"the whale and his captors, or the whaleman's adventures and the
whale's biography, gathered on the homeward cruise of the commodore
preble." by rev. henry t. cheever.

"if you make the least damn bit of noise," replied samuel, "i will send
you to hell." --life of samuel comstock (the mutineer), by his brother,
william comstock. another version of the whale-ship globe narrative.

"the voyages of the dutch and english to the northern ocean, in order,
if possible, to discover a passage through it to india, though they
failed of their main object, laid-open the haunts of the whale."
--mcculloch's commercial dictionary.

"these things are reciprocal; the ball rebounds, only to bound forward
again; for now in laying open the haunts of the whale, the whalemen seem
to have indirectly hit upon new clews to that same mystic north-west
passage." --from "something" unpublished.

"it is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean without being struck
by her near appearance. the vessel under short sail, with look-outs at
the mast-heads, eagerly scanning the wide expanse around them, has a
totally different air from those engaged in regular voyage." --currents
and whaling. u.s. ex. ex.

"pedestrians in the vicinity of london and elsewhere may recollect
having seen large curved bones set upright in the earth, either to form
arches over gateways, or entrances to alcoves, and they may perhaps
have been told that these were the ribs of whales." --tales of a whale
voyager to the arctic ocean.

"it was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these whales,
that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession of the savages
enrolled among the crew." --newspaper account of the taking and retaking
of the whale-ship hobomack.

"it is generally well known that out of the crews of whaling vessels
(american) few ever return in the ships on board of which they
departed." --cruise in a whale boat.

"suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot up
perpendicularly into the air. it was the while." --miriam coffin or the
whale fisherman.

"the whale is harpooned to be sure; but bethink you, how you would
manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the mere appliance of a rope tied
to the root of his tail." --a chapter on whaling in ribs and trucks.

"on one occasion i saw two of these monsters (whales) probably male and
female, slowly swimming, one after the other, within less than a stone's
throw of the shore" (terra del fuego), "over which the beech tree
extended its branches." --darwin's voyage of a naturalist.

"'stern all!' exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his head, he saw the
distended jaws of a large sperm whale close to the head of the boat,
threatening it with instant destruction;--'stern all, for your lives!'"
--wharton the whale killer.

"so be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, while the bold
harpooneer is striking the whale!" --nantucket song.

     "oh, the rare old whale, mid storm and gale
     in his ocean home will be
     a giant in might, where might is right,
     and king of the boundless sea."
     --whale song.




chapter 1. loomings.


call me ishmael. some years ago--never mind how long precisely--having
little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on
shore, i thought i would sail about a little and see the watery part of
the world. it is a way i have of driving off the spleen and regulating
the circulation. whenever i find myself growing grim about the mouth;
whenever it is a damp, drizzly november in my soul; whenever i find
myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up
the rear of every funeral i meet; and especially whenever my hypos get
such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to
prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically
knocking people's hats off--then, i account it high time to get to sea
as soon as i can. this is my substitute for pistol and ball. with a
philosophical flourish cato throws himself upon his sword; i quietly
take to the ship. there is nothing surprising in this. if they but knew
it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very
nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.

there now is your insular city of the manhattoes, belted round by
wharves as indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it with
her surf. right and left, the streets take you waterward. its extreme
downtown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and
cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land.
look at the crowds of water-gazers there.

circumambulate the city of a dreamy sabbath afternoon. go from corlears
hook to coenties slip, and from thence, by whitehall, northward. what
do you see?--posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand
thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. some
leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some
looking over the bulwarks of ships from china; some high aloft in the
rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep. but these
are all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath and plaster--tied to
counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. how then is this? are
the green fields gone? what do they here?

but look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and
seemingly bound for a dive. strange! nothing will content them but the
extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder
warehouses will not suffice. no. they must get just as nigh the water
as they possibly can without falling in. and there they stand--miles of
them--leagues. inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streets
and avenues--north, east, south, and west. yet here they all unite.
tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of all
those ships attract them thither?

once more. say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. take
almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a
dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. there is magic
in it. let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepest
reveries--stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and he will
infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that region.
should you ever be athirst in the great american desert, try this
experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical
professor. yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded for
ever.

but here is an artist. he desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of
the saco. what is the chief element he employs? there stand his trees,
each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and
here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder
cottage goes a sleepy smoke. deep into distant woodlands winds a
mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in their
hill-side blue. but though the picture lies thus tranced, and though
this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd's
head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon the
magic stream before him. go visit the prairies in june, when for scores
on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among tiger-lilies--what is the
one charm wanting?--water--there is not a drop of water there! were
niagara but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to
see it? why did the poor poet of tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two
handfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly
needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to rockaway beach? why
is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at
some time or other crazy to go to sea? why upon your first voyage as a
passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first
told that you and your ship were now out of sight of land? why did the
old persians hold the sea holy? why did the greeks give it a separate
deity, and own brother of jove? surely all this is not without meaning.
and still deeper the meaning of that story of narcissus, who because
he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image he saw in the fountain,
plunged into it and was drowned. but that same image, we ourselves see
in all rivers and oceans. it is the image of the ungraspable phantom of
life; and this is the key to it all.

now, when i say that i am in the habit of going to sea whenever i begin
to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs,
i do not mean to have it inferred that i ever go to sea as a passenger.
for to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is
but a rag unless you have something in it. besides, passengers get
sea-sick--grow quarrelsome--don't sleep of nights--do not enjoy
themselves much, as a general thing;--no, i never go as a passenger;
nor, though i am something of a salt, do i ever go to sea as a
commodore, or a captain, or a cook. i abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices to those who like them. for my part, i abominate all
honourable respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind
whatsoever. it is quite as much as i can do to take care of myself,
without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not.
and as for going as cook,--though i confess there is considerable glory
in that, a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board--yet, somehow,
i never fancied broiling fowls;--though once broiled, judiciously
buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is no one who
will speak more respectfully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled
fowl than i will. it is out of the idolatrous dotings of the old
egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that you see the
mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.

no, when i go to sea, i go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,
plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.
true, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to
spar, like a grasshopper in a may meadow. and at first, this sort
of thing is unpleasant enough. it touches one's sense of honour,
particularly if you come of an old established family in the land, the
van rensselaers, or randolphs, or hardicanutes. and more than all,
if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been
lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys stand
in awe of you. the transition is a keen one, i assure you, from a
schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of seneca and
the stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. but even this wears off in
time.

what of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom
and sweep down the decks? what does that indignity amount to, weighed,
i mean, in the scales of the new testament? do you think the archangel
gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because i promptly and
respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance? who ain't
a slave? tell me that. well, then, however the old sea-captains may
order me about--however they may thump and punch me about, i have the
satisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that everybody else is
one way or other served in much the same way--either in a physical
or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump is
passed round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder-blades, and
be content.

again, i always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of
paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single
penny that i ever heard of. on the contrary, passengers themselves must
pay. and there is all the difference in the world between paying
and being paid. the act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable
infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. but being
paid,--what will compare with it? the urbane activity with which a man
receives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestly
believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no account
can a monied man enter heaven. ah! how cheerfully we consign ourselves
to perdition!

finally, i always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome
exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck. for as in this world,
head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is,
if you never violate the pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the
commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from
the sailors on the forecastle. he thinks he breathes it first; but not
so. in much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many
other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it.
but wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a
merchant sailor, i should now take it into my head to go on a whaling
voyage; this the invisible police officer of the fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me
in some unaccountable way--he can better answer than any one else. and,
doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand
programme of providence that was drawn up a long time ago. it came in as
a sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive performances.
i take it that this part of the bill must have run something like this:


"grand contested election for the presidency of the united states.

"whaling voyage by one ishmael.

"bloody battle in affghanistan."


though i cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the
fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when others
were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and
easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces--though
i cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that i recall all the
circumstances, i think i can see a little into the springs and motives
which being cunningly presented to me under various disguises, induced
me to set about performing the part i did, besides cajoling me into the
delusion that it was a choice resulting from my own unbiased freewill
and discriminating judgment.

chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great
whale himself. such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my
curiosity. then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island
bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all
the attending marvels of a thousand patagonian sights and sounds, helped
to sway me to my wish. with other men, perhaps, such things would not
have been inducements; but as for me, i am tormented with an everlasting
itch for things remote. i love to sail forbidden seas, and land on
barbarous coasts. not ignoring what is good, i am quick to perceive a
horror, and could still be social with it--would they let me--since it
is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of the place
one lodges in.

by reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the
great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild
conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into
my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them
all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.



chapter 2. the carpet-bag.


i stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm,
and started for cape horn and the pacific. quitting the good city of
old manhatto, i duly arrived in new bedford. it was a saturday night in
december. much was i disappointed upon learning that the little packet
for nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching that place
would offer, till the following monday.

as most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at
this same new bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well
be related that i, for one, had no idea of so doing. for my mind was
made up to sail in no other than a nantucket craft, because there was a
fine, boisterous something about everything connected with that famous
old island, which amazingly pleased me. besides though new bedford has
of late been gradually monopolising the business of whaling, and though
in this matter poor old nantucket is now much behind her, yet nantucket
was her great original--the tyre of this carthage;--the place where the
first dead american whale was stranded. where else but from nantucket
did those aboriginal whalemen, the red-men, first sally out in canoes to
give chase to the leviathan? and where but from nantucket, too, did that
first adventurous little sloop put forth, partly laden with imported
cobblestones--so goes the story--to throw at the whales, in order to
discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from the bowsprit?

now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me
in new bedford, ere i could embark for my destined port, it became a
matter of concernment where i was to eat and sleep meanwhile. it was a
very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold
and cheerless. i knew no one in the place. with anxious grapnels i had
sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver,--so,
wherever you go, ishmael, said i to myself, as i stood in the middle of
a dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards the
north with the darkness towards the south--wherever in your wisdom you
may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear ishmael, be sure to inquire
the price, and don't be too particular.

with halting steps i paced the streets, and passed the sign of "the
crossed harpoons"--but it looked too expensive and jolly there. further
on, from the bright red windows of the "sword-fish inn," there came such
fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from
before the house, for everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches
thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement,--rather weary for me, when i struck
my foot against the flinty projections, because from hard, remorseless
service the soles of my boots were in a most miserable plight. too
expensive and jolly, again thought i, pausing one moment to watch the
broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses
within. but go on, ishmael, said i at last; don't you hear? get away
from before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way. so on i
went. i now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward, for
there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.

such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand,
and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. at
this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of
the town proved all but deserted. but presently i came to a smoky light
proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which stood invitingly
open. it had a careless look, as if it were meant for the uses of the
public; so, entering, the first thing i did was to stumble over an
ash-box in the porch. ha! thought i, ha, as the flying particles almost
choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city, gomorrah? but "the
crossed harpoons," and "the sword-fish?"--this, then must needs be the
sign of "the trap." however, i picked myself up and hearing a loud voice
within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door.

it seemed the great black parliament sitting in tophet. a hundred black
faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black angel
of doom was beating a book in a pulpit. it was a negro church; and the
preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and
wailing and teeth-gnashing there. ha, ishmael, muttered i, backing out,
wretched entertainment at the sign of 'the trap!'

moving on, i at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks,
and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a swinging
sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representing
a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words underneath--"the
spouter inn:--peter coffin."

coffin?--spouter?--rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought
i. but it is a common name in nantucket, they say, and i suppose this
peter here is an emigrant from there. as the light looked so dim, and
the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated little
wooden house itself looked as if it might have been carted here from
the ruins of some burnt district, and as the swinging sign had a
poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, i thought that here was the very
spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea coffee.

it was a queer sort of place--a gable-ended old house, one side palsied
as it were, and leaning over sadly. it stood on a sharp bleak corner,
where that tempestuous wind euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever
it did about poor paul's tossed craft. euroclydon, nevertheless, is a
mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the hob
quietly toasting for bed. "in judging of that tempestuous wind called
euroclydon," says an old writer--of whose works i possess the only copy
extant--"it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou lookest out at
it from a glass window where the frost is all on the outside, or whether
thou observest it from that sashless window, where the frost is on both
sides, and of which the wight death is the only glazier." true enough,
thought i, as this passage occurred to my mind--old black-letter, thou
reasonest well. yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is
the house. what a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the crannies
though, and thrust in a little lint here and there. but it's too late
to make any improvements now. the universe is finished; the copestone
is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago. poor lazarus
there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone for his pillow, and
shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he might plug up both ears
with rags, and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not
keep out the tempestuous euroclydon. euroclydon! says old dives, in his
red silken wrapper--(he had a redder one afterwards) pooh, pooh! what
a fine frosty night; how orion glitters; what northern lights! let them
talk of their oriental summer climes of everlasting conservatories; give
me the privilege of making my own summer with my own coals.

but what thinks lazarus? can he warm his blue hands by holding them up
to the grand northern lights? would not lazarus rather be in sumatra
than here? would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the
line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in
order to keep out this frost?

now, that lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the
door of dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be
moored to one of the moluccas. yet dives himself, he too lives like a
czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a
temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

but no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there is
plenty of that yet to come. let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet,
and see what sort of a place this "spouter" may be.



chapter 3. the spouter-inn.


entering that gable-ended spouter-inn, you found yourself in a wide,
low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of
the bulwarks of some condemned old craft. on one side hung a very large
oilpainting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the
unequal crosslights by which you viewed it, it was only by diligent
study and a series of systematic visits to it, and careful inquiry of
the neighbors, that you could any way arrive at an understanding of its
purpose. such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at first
you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in the time of the new
england hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched. but by dint
of much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, and
especially by throwing open the little window towards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however
wild, might not be altogether unwarranted.

but what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous,
black mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over three
blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. a boggy,
soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted.
yet was there a sort of indefinite, half-attained, unimaginable
sublimity about it that fairly froze you to it, till you involuntarily
took an oath with yourself to find out what that marvellous painting
meant. ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dart you
through.--it's the black sea in a midnight gale.--it's the unnatural
combat of the four primal elements.--it's a blasted heath.--it's a
hyperborean winter scene.--it's the breaking-up of the icebound stream
of time. but at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous
something in the picture's midst. that once found out, and all the rest
were plain. but stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic
fish? even the great leviathan himself?

in fact, the artist's design seemed this: a final theory of my own,
partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whom
i conversed upon the subject. the picture represents a cape-horner in a
great hurricane; the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three
dismantled masts alone visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing to
spring clean over the craft, is in the enormous act of impaling himself
upon the three mast-heads.

the opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish
array of monstrous clubs and spears. some were thickly set with
glittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of
human hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round
like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower. you
shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage
could ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying
implement. mixed with these were rusty old whaling lances and harpoons
all broken and deformed. some were storied weapons. with this once long
lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did nathan swain kill fifteen
whales between a sunrise and a sunset. and that harpoon--so like a
corkscrew now--was flung in javan seas, and run away with by a whale,
years afterwards slain off the cape of blanco. the original iron entered
nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a
man, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the
hump.

crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way--cut
through what in old times must have been a great central chimney with
fireplaces all round--you enter the public room. a still duskier place
is this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled
planks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod some old craft's
cockpits, especially of such a howling night, when this corner-anchored
old ark rocked so furiously. on one side stood a long, low, shelf-like
table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty rarities
gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks. projecting from the
further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den--the bar--a rude
attempt at a right whale's head. be that how it may, there stands the
vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive
beneath it. within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters,
bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like another
cursed jonah (by which name indeed they called him), bustles a little
withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the sailors
deliriums and death.

abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. though
true cylinders without--within, the villanous green goggling glasses
deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. parallel meridians
rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets. fill to
this mark, and your charge is but a penny; to this a penny more; and so
on to the full glass--the cape horn measure, which you may gulp down for
a shilling.

upon entering the place i found a number of young seamen gathered about
a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of skrimshander. i
sought the landlord, and telling him i desired to be accommodated with a
room, received for answer that his house was full--not a bed unoccupied.
"but avast," he added, tapping his forehead, "you haint no objections
to sharing a harpooneer's blanket, have ye? i s'pose you are goin'
a-whalin', so you'd better get used to that sort of thing."

i told him that i never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if i should
ever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and
that if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and the
harpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander
further about a strange town on so bitter a night, i would put up with
the half of any decent man's blanket.

"i thought so. all right; take a seat. supper?--you want supper?
supper'll be ready directly."

i sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
battery. at one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with
his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space
between his legs. he was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but
he didn't make much headway, i thought.

at last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an
adjoining room. it was cold as iceland--no fire at all--the landlord
said he couldn't afford it. nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each
in a winding sheet. we were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and
hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half frozen fingers. but
the fare was of the most substantial kind--not only meat and potatoes,
but dumplings; good heavens! dumplings for supper! one young fellow in
a green box coat, addressed himself to these dumplings in a most direful
manner.

"my boy," said the landlord, "you'll have the nightmare to a dead
sartainty."

"landlord," i whispered, "that aint the harpooneer is it?"

"oh, no," said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, "the harpooneer
is a dark complexioned chap. he never eats dumplings, he don't--he eats
